test-plan.txt
Manual tests of functionality


Specific tests
--------------

Do: Move the cursor beyond the end of the file and press Delete.
Check: Nothing should happen.

Do: Move the cursor beyond the end of the file and press Backspace.
Check: Nothing should happen.

Do: Select multiple whole lines of text.
Check: Selection box should be a clean rectangle containing those
lines, but not extending into the left margin.

Do: Open 11 files at once.
Check: The window menu should assign Alt+<digit> shortcuts to the
10 of the open files.

Do: Open test/allbytes.txt .
Check: See all the Latin-1 glyphs arranged in a 16x16 grid, including
hex quads for the nonprintable characters.


Test name: Multiple window simultaneous edit.

Part A:

  Do: Open the same file in two windows.  In the left window, put the
  cursor on the line halfway through the file and press Ctrl+L to center
  the display on that line.  In the other window, move the cursor a page
  or so above the halfway point.  Now press Ctrl+K repeatedly (or hold
  it) to delete lines including the one containing the cursor in the
  left window.

  Check: In the left window, the cursor's distance from the top of the
  window should remain unchanged.  While lines above it are being
  deleted, it should remain on the same line as identified by line
  contents; i.e., the line number should be decreasing.  The display
  should show the updated file contents and cursor location after every
  deletion.

Part B:

  Do: Same as A, but this time with a word selected in the left window.

  Check: Same basic behavior as before.  The same set of characters
  should remain selected until they are deleted.

Part C:

  Do: After the same setup as A, in the right window, go near the line
  that has the cursor in the left window and insert lines above, on, and
  below that line.

  Check: Again the left window cursor should remain the same distance
  from the top of the window and its line contents remain the same.

Part D:

  Do: Same as part C but with text selected.

  Check: Same as part C.


Areas to test (needs refinement into specific tests)
----------------------------------------------------

Load a file specifying its name on the command line.

Scrolling the buffer.

Resizing the window.

Selecting text.

Interactive search.


EOF
